AI linked to a fourfold increase in productivity growth and 56% wage premium globally; demand for roles requiring AI-related skills increased in Hong Kong
Hong Kong, 13 June 2025 – AI is making workers more valuable, productive, and able to command higher wage premiums, with job numbers rising even in roles considered most automatable, according to PwC’s 2025 Global AI Jobs Barometer. The report is based on analysis of close to a billion job ads and thousands of company financial reports from six continents.

The report finds that since GenAI’s proliferation in 2022, productivity growth has nearly quadrupled in industries most exposed to AI (e.g. financial services, software publishing), rising from 7% from 2018-2022 to 27% between 2018-2024. In contrast, the rate of productivity growth in industries least exposed to AI (e.g. mining, hospitality) declined from 10% to 9% over the same period. Data from 2024 shows that the most AI exposed industries are now seeing 3x higher growth in revenue per employee than the least exposed.

Carol Stubbings, Global Chief Commercial Officer, PwC, said: “This research shows that the power of AI to deliver for businesses is already being realised. And we are only at the start of the transition. As we roll out Agentic AI at enterprise scale, we are seeing that the right combination of technology and culture can create dramatic new opportunities to reimagine how organisations work and create value.”

Job numbers are rising in virtually every type of AI-exposed occupation, even those highly automatable

Contrary to some expectations, the data from the report does not show job or wage destruction from AI.

While occupations with lower exposure to AI saw strong job growth (65%) in recent years (2019-2024), growth remained robust even in more exposed occupations (38%). Within more exposed occupations, jobs can be further divided into ‘automated’ (i.e., the job contains some tasks that AI can carry out) and ‘augmented’ (i.e., where AI helps a human do their job better). Across both classifications between 2019-24, job numbers are growing in every industry analysed, although augmented jobs are generally growing faster.

Wages are growing twice as fast in AI-exposed industries

Wages are growing twice as fast in industries more exposed to AI versus less exposed, with wages rising in both automatable and augmentable jobs. Jobs which require AI skills also offer a wage premium (over similar roles that don’t require AI skills) in every industry analysed, with the average premium hitting 56%, up from 25% last year. Jobs that require such AI skills also continue to grow faster than all jobs – rising 7.5% from last year, even as total job postings fell 11.3%.

Joe Atkinson, Global Chief AI Officer, PwC, said: “In contrast to worries that AI could cause sharp reductions in the number of jobs available – this year's findings show jobs are growing in virtually every type of AI-exposed occupation, including highly automatable ones. AI is amplifying and democratising expertise, enabling employees to multiply their impact and focus on higher-level responsibilities. With the right foundations, both companies and workers can re-define their roles and industries and emerge leaders in their field, particularly as the full gambit of applications becomes clearer.”

The skills earthquake accelerates – AI is creating deep change in the skills workers need to succeed

While the picture on productivity, wages and jobs is broadly positive, the research does highlight the need for workers and businesses to adapt to a much faster pace of change. The skills sought by employers are changing 66% faster in occupations most exposed to AI, up from 25% last year. What it takes to succeed in AI-exposed jobs is changing in other ways. Employer demand for formal degrees is declining for all jobs, but especially quickly for AI-exposed jobs. 

Peter Brown, Global Workforce Leader, PwC, said: “AI’s rapid advance is not just re-shaping industries, but fundamentally altering the workforce and the skills required. This is not a situation that employers can easily buy their way out of. Even if they can pay the premium required to attract talent with AI skills, those skills can quickly become out of date without investment in the systems to help the workforce learn.”

Demand for roles requiring AI-related skills increased in Hong Kong

In Hong Kong, while new job listings were scarcer in 2024 than the preceding two years, there was a rise in the proportion of job postings seeking AI skills, rising from 1.6% of postings to 1.9%. The Information & Communication sector saw the most consistent rise in new jobs requiring AI skills in the city, increasing from 6.4% in 2021 to 7.2% in 2024. Over the period, AI skill requirements in other sectors remained relatively consistent. 

Concurrently, an overarching trend, spanning all industries in Hong Kong has been observed, showing jobs requiring AI augmentation have increased by 6%, while automated roles decreased by around 7% across all industries. The sector making the most of AI augmentation in Hong Kong has been Public Administration and Defence, with growth in AI oriented jobs exceeding 50%. Additionally, Energy and Water Supply sectors all experienced growth above 30% in AI augmented jobs since 2021. This reflects increased demand for roles that collate AI with human expertise.

Wilson Chow, PwC Global TMT Industry Leader and China AI Leader said: “As a global hub of ingenuity, Hong Kong is uniquely positioned to unlock the redefined employment opportunities emerging from an AI enabled work landscape. The report underscores that rather than acting as a replacement for human creativity, AI is optimally deployed as a transformative ‘enhancer’, pushing boundaries, amplifying capabilities, to drive greater efficiency and productivity across industries.” 

The AI business imperative

If businesses are to turbocharge their growth and leverage the opportunity afforded by AI, they must put AI front-and-centre, now. The report recommends five key actions for businesses:

Use AI for enterprise-wide transformation.
Treat AI as a growth strategy, not just an efficiency strategy.
Prioritise Agentic AI.
Enable your workforce to have the skills to make the most of AI’s power.
Unlock AI’s transformative potential by building trust. 
 

Notes to Editors 

About the PwC 2025 AI Jobs Barometer

The AI Jobs Barometer analysed close to a billion job ads and thousands of company financial reports across six continents to reveal AI's impact on jobs, wages, skills, and productivity. The Barometer includes some of the most recent available data on AI's impact including the latest available job ads and company reports through the end of 2024. We define a job as ‘AI-exposed’ if it contains many tasks in which AI can be used according to the well-established AI Occupational Exposure index. Definitions: ‘More exposed’ jobs are the 50% of jobs with greater AI exposure; ‘Less exposed’ jobs are the 50% of jobs with lower AI exposure; ‘Most exposed’ jobs are the 25% of jobs with the greatest AI exposure. We use the IMF's methodology to separately analyse AI-exposed jobs that are highly automatable (which means the job contains many tasks AI can perform) versus jobs that are highly augmentable (which means the job contains many tasks in which AI supports human expertise and judgment).

Unemployment among college graduates is increasing
“The discussion about AI taking jobs, or at least good jobs, is generally framed as tomorrow’s problem. However, there are some hints that AI may already be taking ‘knowledge worker’ jobs,” said Michael Feroli, chief U.S. economist at J.P. Morgan.

For starters, the unemployment rate among college graduates has increased, reaching 5.8% in March — the highest in more than four years. “Disturbingly, the unemployment rate has been trending above the aggregate rate, which is highly unusual by historical standards,” noted Murat Tasci, senior U.S. economist at J.P. Morgan. While the trend could be partially due to a secular rise in the relative supply of college graduates and unusually low labor market churn, the effects of AI could also be at play.

To investigate the impact of AI on graduate unemployment, the economics team at J.P. Morgan Global Research examined the cross-sectional distribution of unemployment rates by college major, noting that the technology could affect some fields more than others. Overall, anthropology graduates — who are not particularly exposed to AI — have had most difficulty finding jobs. However, other majors exposed to AI, including computer engineering, graphic design, industrial engineering and architecture, have also experienced significant increases in graduate unemployment, highlighting AI’s impact on job growth.

“To the extent that exposure to AI displaces some workers with specific majors, new entrants from those majors could be at a greater disadvantage, as experience could offset some of the skills that are now obsolete with AI-performed tasks,” Tasci said.

Job growth is slowing across certain tech industries
In addition to rising unemployment among college graduates, job growth across several white-collar sectors has been tepid, pointing to AI’s growing role in the workforce.

To this end, the economics team compared changes in employment trends with AI exposure across industries, as well as within detailed subsectors of professional employment, using data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) and Anthropic AI. On the whole, there is a mildly negative correlation between employment trends and AI usage, suggesting that AI may be depressing job growth.

This trend is especially evident in certain tech industries, including cloud, web search and computer systems design. After years of steady employment gains, these three industries stopped growing at the end of 2022, just after the release of ChatGPT. “While firms may also have been retrenching after their post-COVID hiring, the rise of large language models (LLMs) produced a product that automated some of their labor via code assistance, while at the same time reshaping their business strategy,” Feroli noted.

On the other hand, this trend isn’t as apparent within the professional and business services segment. “The most likely explanation for our non-result across non-tech industries is that AI is simply too recent to have materially changed business practices, even if it were to ultimately prove impactful,” Feroli said. Indeed, BTOS data shows that as of mid-2025, less than 10% of firms in the overall economy indicate they are using AI regularly, with the figure rising to just over 20% in the professional, scientific and technical industries.

“All in all, we find little association between various measures of AI intensity and job growth outside of selected tech industries, and conclude that so far AI has not been a major driver of the composition of employment gains, except perhaps in tech,” Feroli added. 

AI could affect the labor market in the next recession

In addition to its impact on job growth, AI could prolong the recovery of the labor market in the event of a downturn. “We think that during the next recession, the speed and breadth of the adoption of AI tools and applications in the workplace might induce a large-scale displacement for occupations that consist of primarily non-routine cognitive tasks,” Tasci said.

Back in the 1980s, middle-skill occupations that rely on routine tasks — such as sales, manufacturing construction and maintenance — started disappearing due to automation. Notably, their decline had a pronounced cyclical behavior. Throughout the downturns over the following decades, it took increasingly longer for these occupations to bounce back from recession-induced job losses, each time resulting in a jobless recovery — an economic situation in which the overall economy improves but payrolls grow only slowly.  

Today, AI exposes non-routine cognitive occupations — such as scientists, engineers, designers and lawyers — to similar risks. “As the cost of adaptation comes down with the wide dissemination of AI tools and applications, these traditionally high-wage occupations might come under pressure,” Tasci noted.

This is compounded by the rising unemployment risk among these occupations, which has now surpassed that of workers from non-routine manual jobs. “Workers who were last employed in non-routine cognitive jobs have always accounted for the smallest share of the unemployed, until recently. This changing pattern might be indicative of rising unemployment risk for these workers going forward,” Tasci said.

Taken together, these factors suggest that a jobless recovery could recur in the future. “Overall, a much larger unemployment risk and anemic recovery prospects for workers in non-routine cognitive occupations might cause the next labor market downturn to look pretty dismal,” Tasci added.  

Since its founding in 1990, the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) has sought 
to develop a deeper understanding of the evolving global economy. As the 
business and economics research arm of McKinsey & Company, MGI aims 
to provide leaders in the commercial, public, and social sectors with the facts 
and insights on which to base management and policy decisions.
MGI research combines the disciplines of economics and management, 
employing the analytical tools of economics with the insights of business 
leaders. Our “micro-to-macro” methodology examines microeconomic 
industry trends to better understand the broad macroeconomic forces 
affecting business strategy and public policy. MGI’s in-depth reports have 
covered more than 20 countries and 30 industries. Current research focuses 
on six themes: productivity and growth, natural resources, labor markets, 
the evolution of global financial markets, the economic impact of technology 
and innovation, and urbanization. Recent reports have assessed the 
digital economy, the impact of AI and automation on employment, income 
inequality, the productivity puzzle, the economic benefits of tackling gender 
inequality, a new era of global competition, Chinese innovation, and digital and 
f
inancial globalization.
MGI is led by three McKinsey & Company senior partners: Jacques Bughin, 
Jonathan Woetzel, and James Manyika, who also serves as the chairman 
of MGI. Michael Chui, Susan Lund, Anu Madgavkar, Jan Mischke, 
Sree Ramaswamy, and Jaana Remes are MGI partners, and Mekala Krishnan 
and Jeongmin Seong are MGI senior fellows.
Project teams are led by the MGI partners and a group of senior fellows, 
and include consultants from McKinsey offices around the world. These 
teams draw on McKinsey’s global network of partners and industry and 
management experts. Advice and input to MGI research are provided by 
the MGI Council, members of which are also involved in MGI’s research. 
MGI Council members are drawn from around the world and from various 
sectors and include Andrés Cadena, Sandrine Devillard, Richard Dobbs, 
Tarek Elmasry, Katy George, Rajat Gupta, Eric Hazan, Eric Labaye, Acha Leke, 
Scott Nyquist, Gary Pinkus, Sven Smit, Oliver Tonby, and Eckart Windhagen. 
In addition, leading economists, including Nobel laureates, act as advisers to 
MGI research.
The partners of McKinsey fund MGI’s research; it is not commissioned by any 
business, government, or other institution. For further information about MGI 
and to download reports, please visit www.mckinsey.com/mgi.

NOTES FROM THE AI FRONTIER: 
MODELING THE IMPACT OF AI 
ON THE WORLD ECONOMY
Continuing the McKinsey Global Institute’s ongoing exploration of artificial 
intelligence (AI) and its broader implications, this discussion paper focuses 
on modeling AI’s potential impact on the economy. We take a micro-to-macro 
and simulation-based approach in which the adoption of AI by firms arises 
from economic and competition-related incentives, and macro factors have an 
influence. We consider not only the possible benefits but also the costs related 
to implementation and disruption.
AI has large potential to contribute to global economic activity. 
Looking at several broad categories of AI technologies, we model trends 
in adoption, using early adopters and their performance as a leading 
indicator of how businesses across the board may (want to) absorb AI. 
Based on early evidence, our average simulation shows around 70 percent 
of companies adopting at least one of these types of AI technologies by 
2030, and less than half of large companies may be using the full range of 
AI technologies across their organizations. In the aggregate, and netting 
out competition effects and transition costs, AI could potentially deliver 
additional economic output of around $13 trillion by 2030, boosting global 
GDP by about 1.2 percent a year.
WHAT’S INSIDE?
In brief 
Page 1
Introduction 
Page 2
1. An approach to assessing 
the economic impact of AI 
Page 9
2. AI has the potential to 
be a significant driver of 
economic growth 
Page 12
3. Along with large economic 
gains, AI may bring 
wider gaps 
Page 30
4. Considering key questions 
can help economic entities 
decide how to optimize for AI 
Page 46
The economic impact may emerge gradually and be visible only over 
time. Our simulation suggests that the adoption of AI by firms may follow an 
S-curve pattern—a slow start given the investment associated with learning 
and deploying the technology, and then acceleration driven by competition 
and improvements in complementary capabilities. As a result, AI’s 
contribution to growth may be three or more times higher by 2030 than it is 
over the next five years. Initial investment, ongoing refinement of techniques 
and applications, and significant transition costs might limit adoption by smaller firms.
Technical appendix 
Page 49
Acknowledgments 
Page 61
A key challenge is that adoption of AI could widen gaps between countries, companies, and workers. AI 
may widen performance gaps between countries. Those that establish themselves as AI leaders (mostly developed 
economies) could capture an additional 20 to 25 percent in economic benefits compared with today, while emerging 
economies may capture only half their upside. There could also be a widening gap between companies, with front
runners potentially doubling their returns by 2030 and companies that delay adoption falling behind. For individual 
workers, too, demand—and wages—may grow for those with digital and cognitive skills and with expertise in tasks 
that are hard to automate, but shrink for workers performing repetitive tasks.
How companies and countries choose to embrace AI will likely impact outcomes. The pace of AI adoption 
and the extent to which companies choose to use AI for innovation rather than efficiency gains alone are likely to 
have a large impact on economic outcomes. Similarly, how countries choose to embrace these technologies (or 
not) will likely impact the extent to which their businesses, economies, and societies can benefit. The race is already 
on among companies and countries. In all cases, there are trade-offs that need to be understood and managed 
appropriately in order to capture the potential of AI for the world economy.
The results of this modeling build upon, and are generally consistent with, our previous research, but add new results 
that deepen our understanding of how AI may touch off a competitive race with major implications for firms, labor 
markets, and broader economies, and reinforce our perception of the imperative for businesses, government, and 
society to address the challenges that lie ahead for skills and the world of work. 
INTRODUCTION
The role of artificial intelligence tools and techniques in business and the global economy 
is a hot topic. This is not surprising given recent progress, breakthrough results, and 
demonstrations of AI, as well as the increasingly pervasive products and services already 
in wide use. All of this has led to speculation that AI may usher in radical—arguably 
unprecedented—changes in the way people live and work.
This discussion paper is part of MGI’s ongoing effort to understand AI, the future of work, 
and the impact of automation on skills. It largely focuses on the impact of AI on economic 
growth.1 Our hope is that this effort helps us to broaden our understanding of how AI 
may impact economic activity, and potentially touch off a competitive race with major 
implications for firms, labor markets, and economies. Three key findings emerge:
AI has large potential to contribute to global economic activity. AI is not a single 
technology but a family of technologies. In this paper, we look at five broad categories of 
AI technologies: computer vision, natural language, virtual assistants, robotic process 
automation, and advanced machine learning. Companies will likely use these tools to 
varying degrees. Some will take an opportunistic approach, testing only one technology 
and piloting it in a specific function. Others may be bolder, adopting all five and then 
absorbing them across their entire organization. For the sake of our modeling, we define 
the first approach as adoption and the second as full absorption.2 Between these two 
poles will be many companies at different stages of adoption; the model captures partial 
impact, too. By 2030, our average simulation shows, some 70 percent of companies 
may have adopted at least one type of AI technology, but less than half may have fully 
absorbed the five categories.3
The pattern of adoption and full absorption may be relatively rapid—at the high end of 
what has been observed with other technologies. However, several barriers may hinder 
rapid adoption. For instance, late adopters may find it difficult to generate impact from 
AI because AI opportunities have already been captured by front-runners, and they lag 
behind in developing capabilities and attracting talent.4 Nevertheless, at the average level 
of adoption implied by our simulation, and netting out competition effects and transition 
costs, AI could potentially deliver additional global economic activity of around $13 trillion 
1
2
3
4
2
A version of this discussion paper is published in a forthcoming white paper on AI published by the 
International Telecommunication Union but, as with all MGI research, is independent and has not been 
commissioned or sponsored in any way. MGI research on the future of work, automation, skills, and AI can 
be read and downloaded at mckinsey.com/mgi/our-research/technology-and-innovation. Key publications 
relevant to this paper include A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey 
Global Institute, January 2017; Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, 
McKinsey Global Institute, December 2017; Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from hundreds of use cases, 
McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018; and Skill shift: Automation and the future of the workforce, McKinsey 
Global Institute, May 2018. For a data visualization of AI and other analytics, see Visualizing the uses and 
potential impact of AI and other analytics, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018 (mckinsey.com/featured
insights/artificial-intelligence/visualizing-the-uses-and-potential-impact-of-ai-and-other-analytics).
In this paper, we use the terms “adoption,” “diffusion,” and “absorption.” We define adoption as investment 
in a technology, diffusion as how adoption spreads—the process by which an innovation is communicated 
over time among the participants in a social system—and absorption as how technology is used within a 
f
irm. “Full absorption” is when a company uses the adopted technology for all operational purposes across 
its broad workflow system. These definitions align with those in academic literature. See, for instance, Tomaž 
Turk and Peter Trkman, “Bass model estimates for broadband diffusion in European countries,” Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, 2012, Volume 79, Issue 1; David H. Wong et al., “Predicting the diffusion 
pattern of internet-based communication applications using bass model parameter estimates for email,” 
Journal of Internet Business, 2011, Issue 9; and Kenneth L. Kraemer, Sean Xu, and Kevin Zhuk, “The process 
of innovation assimilation by firms in different countries: A technology diffusion perspective on e-business,” 
Management Science, October 1, 2006.
These percentages need to be understood not in terms of numbers of firms per se, but in terms of their share 
of economic activity.
These industry dynamics between front-runners and followers are called the “rank effect” in the literature on 
technology adoption literature. See Paul Stoneman and John Vickers, “The assessment: The economics of 
technology policy,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 1988, Volume 4, Issue 4.
Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy
McKinsey Global Institute
globally by 2030, or about 16 percent higher cumulative GDP compared with today. This 
amounts to about 1.2 percent additional GDP growth per year. If delivered, this impact 
would compare well with that of other general-purpose technologies through history.5 
Consider, for instance, that the introduction of steam engines during the 1800s boosted 
labor productivity by an estimated 0.3 percent a year, the impact from robots during the 
1990s around 0.4 percent, and the spread of IT during the 2000s 0.6 percent.6
The economic impact may emerge gradually and be visible only over time. The 
impact of AI may not be linear, but may build up at an accelerating pace over time. AI’s 
contribution to growth may be three or more times higher by 2030 than it is over the next 
f
ive years. An S-curve pattern of AI adoption is likely—a slow start due to substantial 
costs and investment associated with learning and deploying these technologies, but 
then an acceleration driven by the cumulative effect of competition and an improvement 
in complementary capabilities. The fact that it takes time for productivity to unfold may 
be reminiscent of the Solow Paradox.7 Complementary management and process 
innovations will likely be necessary to take full advantage of AI innovations.8 It would be a 
misjudgment to interpret this “slow-burn” pattern of impact as proof that the effect of AI 
will be limited. The size of benefits for those who move into these technologies early will 
build up in later years at the expense of firms with limited or no adoption.
A key challenge is that adoption of AI could widen gaps between countries, 
companies, and workers. AI could deliver a boost to economic activity, but the 
distribution of benefits is likely to be uneven:
— Countries. AI may widen gaps between countries, reinforcing the current digital 
divide.9 Countries may need different strategies and responses because AI adoption 
levels vary. AI leaders (mostly in developed countries) could increase their lead in AI 
adoption over developing countries. Leading countries could capture an additional 
20 to 25 percent in net economic benefits compared with today, while developing 
countries may capture only about 5 to 15 percent. Many developed countries may 
have no choice but to push AI to capture higher productivity growth as their GDP 
growth momentum slows, in many cases partly reflecting the challenges related to 
aging populations. Moreover, wage rates in these economies are high, which means 
that there is more incentive than in low-wage, developing countries to substitute 
labor with machines. Developing countries tend to have other ways to improve 
their productivity, including catching up with best practices and restructuring their 
industries, and may therefore have less incentive to push for AI (which, in any case, 
may offer them a smaller economic benefit than advanced economies). This does 
not mean that developed economies are set to make the best use of AI and that 
developing economies are destined to lose the AI race. Countries can choose to 
strengthen the foundations, enablers, and capabilities needed to reap the potential 
of AI, and be proactive in accelerating adoption. Some developing countries are 
already being ambitious in pushing AI. For instance, China, as we have noted, has 
5
6
7
8
9
McKinsey Global Institute
We acknowledge that direct comparison of the impact of AI with that of past technological innovations may 
not realistically be possible as our quantification of the impact of AI includes a family of technologies. Such 
comparisons are mainly to indicate a broad sense of magnitude.
A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017.
The Solow Paradox is a phenomenon in which increased investment in IT is not visible in productivity statistics. 
For an in-depth debate, see Mekala Krishnan, Jan Mischke, and Jaana Remes, “Is the Solow Paradox back?” 
McKinsey Quarterly, June 2018.
Solving the productivity puzzle: The role of demand and the promise of digitization, McKinsey Global Institute, 
February 2018.
Jan A.G.M. van Dijk, “The evolution of the digital divide: The digital divide turns to inequality of skills and 
usage,” in Jacques Bus et al., eds., Digital Enlightenment Yearbook 2012, Amsterdam, Netherlands: IOS 
Press, 2012.
Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy
3
a national strategy in place to become a global leader in the AI supply chain, and is 
investing heavily.10
— Companies. AI technologies could lead to a performance gap between front-runners 
on one side and slow adopters and nonadopters on the other. At one end of the 
spectrum, front-runners (companies that fully absorb AI tools across their enterprises 
over the next five to seven years) are likely to benefit disproportionately. By 2030, 
they could potentially double their cash flow (economic benefit captured minus 
associated investment and transition costs), which implies additional annual net cash 
f
low growth of about 6 percent for more than the next decade.11 Front-runners tend 
to have a strong starting digital base, a higher propensity to invest in AI, and positive 
views of the business case for AI. Although our simulation treats front-runners as one 
group, in reality, this category is not homogeneous. Some current AI innovators and 
creators have big starting endowments of data, computing power, and specialized 
talent. Other early adopters may not engage in creating these technologies but may 
be innovative in how they deploy them. At the other end of the spectrum is a long tail 
of laggards that do not adopt AI technologies at all or that have not fully absorbed 
them in their enterprises by 2030. This group may experience around a 20 percent 
decline in their cash flow from today’s levels, assuming the same cost and revenue 
model as today. One important driver of this profit pressure is the existence of strong 
competitive dynamics among firms, which could shift market share from laggards to 
front-runners and may prompt debate on the unequal distribution of the benefits of AI.
— Workers. A widening gap may also unfold at the level of individual workers. Demand 
for jobs could shift away from repetitive tasks toward those that are socially and 
cognitively driven and others that involve activities that are hard to automate and 
require more digital skills.12 Job profiles characterized by repetitive tasks and activities 
that require low digital skills may experience the largest decline as a share of total 
employment, from some 40 percent to near 30 percent by 2030. The largest gain 
in share may be in nonrepetitive activities and those that require high digital skills, 
rising from some 40 percent to more than 50 percent. These shifts in employment 
would have an impact on wages. We simulate that around 13 percent of the total 
wage bill could shift to categories requiring nonrepetitive and high digital skills, 
where incomes could rise, while workers in the repetitive and low digital skills 
categories may potentially experience stagnation or even a cut in their wages. The 
share of the total wage bill of the latter group could decline from 33 to 20 percent.13 
Direct consequences of this widening gap in employment and wages would be an 
intensifying war for people, particularly those skilled in developing and utilizing AI 
tools, and structural excess supply for a still relatively high portion of people lacking 
the digital and cognitive skills necessary to work with machines.
10 Artificial intelligence: Implications for China, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2017.
11 Large firms have a competitive advantage in adopting and absorbing AI ahead of industry peers. MGI’s 
econometric simulation suggests that they have adoption rates around ten percentage points higher than 
the average. Similarly, organizations that have a more established digital culture (including elements such 
as institutionalized user experience design thinking, a nimble organization, scaled and integrated agile ways 
of working across business and IT domains, and a leadership culture that fosters and enables a network 
of empowered teams to reach defined goals) are in a better position to accelerate the adoption of AI: their 
adoption rates are around eight percentage points higher than those of companies that do not have a digital 
culture. In fact, early corporate adopters will benefit from the exponential impact, potentially gaining three 
times more economic benefits from AI than followers.
12 Assessment of the impact of AI on individuals in this research mainly focuses on workers. A more complete 
view of the impact on individuals would include discussion of the effect of AI on users, citizens, and 
consumers.
13 For more detail on the impact of automation on wages, see Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo, Low-skill 
and high-skill automation, NBER working paper number 24119, December 2017.
4
Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy
McKinsey Global Institute
Gaps may be widening among firms, workers, and countries, but measures can be taken to 
manage the transition and steer economies toward higher productivity and job growth. The 
disruption that comes with AI may lead to some firms leaving the market and some workers 
losing jobs. There will be major challenges for individuals transitioning to new jobs. However, 
if they are given the support they need to develop and refresh their skills and return to the 
labor market, then resources can be redeployed to more productive parts of the economy.
THE AI REVOLUTION IS NOT IN ITS INFANCY, BUT THE MAJORITY OF THE 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF AI IS YET TO COME
Substantial progress in many areas has accelerated the development of AI, which has the 
potential to reshape the competitive landscape of companies, jobs, and the economic 
development of countries. Over the past few years, there have been many breakthrough 
results and announcements in natural language processing, machine vision, and games like 
Go.14 In addition, many products and services already in wide use employ advances in AI 
such as personal assistants and facial recognition systems. Much of this progress has been 
the result of progress in three areas:
1. Step-change improvements in computing power and capacity. At the silicon 
level, there has been continuous progress from central processing units to graphics 
processing units (GPUs). Today’s GPUs can be 40 to 80 times faster than the quickest 
versions available in 2013. Silicon-level development may put early movers (front
runners in this analysis) at an advantage because they have the resources to drive 
breakthroughs. Companies such as Google are pushing further with tensor processing 
units. Many more silicon-level developments are underway. At the cluster level, cloud 
solutions offer much cheaper computing and storage services on demand. Microsoft 
offers a hybrid solution combining the public and private cloud that helps companies 
rapidly ramp up their computing resources and handle spikes in need without large 
capital outlays.
2. Explosion of data. The world creates an unprecedented amount of data every day, 
feeding algorithms the raw material needed to produce new insights. International Data 
Corporation estimates that there may be 163 zettabytes (one trillion gigabytes) of data 
by 2025, or ten times the data generated in 2016.15 Enormous diversity in the data being 
generated means that organizing and analyzing these data are extremely challenging, 
but that there is an unprecedented opportunity to extract value from data that were not 
available in the past.16
3. Progress in algorithms. The techniques and algorithms underlying AI have continued to 
be developed. Recent advances in deep learning techniques are delivering step changes 
in the accuracy of classification and prediction.17 Deep learning uses large-scale neural 
networks (the most common are convolutional and recurrent neural networks) that 
14 For instance, Eric Horvitz and colleagues at Microsoft Research have demonstrated in-stream supervision 
in which data can be labeled in the course of natural usage. See Eric Horvitz, “Machine learning, reasoning, 
and intelligence in daily life: Directions and challenges,” Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence Techniques for 
Ambient Intelligence, Hyderabad, India, January 2007. AlphaGo Zero used a new form of reinforcement 
learning to defeat its predecessor AlphaGo after learning to play the game Go from scratch. See Demis 
Hassabis et al., AlphaGo Zero: Learning from scratch, deepmind.com. DeepMind researchers have had 
promising results with transfer learning where training is simulated and then transferred to physical robots. See 
Andre A. Rusu et al., Sim-to-real robot learning from pixels with progressive nets, arvix.org, October 2016. 
For more, see Michael Chui, James Manyika, and Mehdi Miremadi, “What AI can and can’t do (yet) for your 
business,” McKinsey Quarterly, January 2018.
15 John Gantz, David Reinsel, and John Rydning, Data age 2025: The evolution of data to life-critical, IDC white 
paper, April 2017.
16 Behavioral, transactional, environmental, and geospatial data are available from sources including the 
web, social media, industrial sensors, payment systems, cameras, wearable devices, and human entry, for 
example. See The age of analytics: Competing in a data-driven world, McKinsey Global Institute, December 
2016.
17 Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Ian Goodfellow, Deep Learning, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2016.
McKinsey Global Institute
Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy
5
learn through the use of training data and backpropagation algorithms. Also emerging 
are meta-learning techniques that are attempting to automate the design of machine
learning models and neural networks by classifying images in large-scale data sets. Also 
notable is the development of reinforcement learning, an unsupervised technique that 
allows algorithms to learn tasks by trial and error, improving their performance through 
repetition and, in many cases—the game of Go being one example—surpassing human 
capabilities.18 In one-shot learning, an AI model can learn about a topic even where there 
is only a small number—even one—of real-world examples, reducing the need for large 
data sets.19
While many of the most public breakthroughs have largely been associated with a relatively 
small group of individuals, companies, and institutions and have mainly, but not exclusively, 
been US-led, this is changing fast. An increasing number of countries are now starting to 
put more emphasis on AI initiatives, with China in particular making huge strides (see Box 1, 
“More countries are taking measures to advance AI”).
Most companies currently face significant limitations on their ability to leverage AI (see 
Box 2, “Current technical limitations to leveraging AI, and some early progress”). However, 
the AI revolution is certainly no longer in its infancy. These technologies are already 
widely used in business. MGI analysis of more than 400 cases in which companies and 
organizations could potentially use AI found that AI is already relatively applicable to real 
business problems and can have significant impact in areas including marketing and sales, 
supply chain management, and manufacturing. The research found that three deep learning 
techniques—feed forward neural networks, recurrent neural networks, and convolutional 
neural networks—together could enable the creation of between $3.5 trillion and $5.8 trillion 
in value each year in nine business functions in 19 countries. This is the equivalent of 1 to 
9 percent of 2016 sector revenue.20
A broad range of companies already use AI tools in a wide variety of ways and functions. As 
of early 2018, AI was used in supply chains (for instance, Amazon’s Kiva robot automation 
in retail logistics); fixed assets (for example, preventive maintenance of assets by companies 
such as Neuron Soundware, which uses artificial auditory cortexes to simulate human 
sound interpretation, and can therefore automate the detection and identification of 
causes of potential breakdown of equipment); R&D (for instance, Quantum Black’s use 
of AI to streamline R&D in Formula 1 racing); and sales and marketing (for example, AI
powered search by Baidu, and Digiday’s AI-based predictive sales target of business-to
business salespeople).21
As funding becomes more widely available, the skills to deploy and manage AI are likely to 
spread to a broader swath of companies and take hold across economies.
18 Matt Burgess, “DeepMind’s latest AI breakthrough is its most significant yet,” Wired, October 18, 2017.
19 Yan Duan et al., One-shot imitation learning, arxiv.org, December 2017.
20 Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from hundreds of use cases, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018.
21 Jeremy Hsu, “Deep learning AI listens to machines for signs of trouble,” IEEE Spectrum, December 27, 2016.
6
Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy
McKinsey Global Institute
Box 1. More countries are taking measures to advance AI
A number of countries have announced initiatives and plans to drive the use of 
AI in their economies. Here we give just a few examples as of mid-2018:
China. The government is prioritizing AI, including its promotion in, for 
instance, its 13th Five-Year Plan (which runs from 2016 to 2020), its Internet 
Plus and AI plans from 2016 to 2018, and a “new generation AI plan.” China 
has stated that it aims to create a domestic AI market of 1 trillion renminbi 
($150 billion) by 2020 and become a world-leading AI center by 2030.1 The 
private sector is pushing actively for AI, too. Three of China’s internet giants—
Alibaba, Baidu, and Tencent—as well as iFlytek, a voice recognition specialist, 
have joined a “national team” to develop AI in in areas such as autonomous 
vehicles, smart cities, and medical imaging.
Europe. European Union (EU) member states have announced their intention 
to collaborate on AI more actively across borders to ensure that Europe 
is competitive in these technologies and that they can tackle their social, 
economic, ethical, and legal ramifications together.2 The EU has called for 
$24 billion to be invested in AI research by 2020.3 A number of European 
countries have also been driving national initiatives. The French government 
has announced an initiative to double the number of people studying and 
researching AI projects, set new boundaries for data sharing, and invest 
$1.85 billion to fund research and startups.4 The United Kingdom has 
published a comprehensive plan to strengthen the core foundation of AI in an 
“artificial intelligence sector deal” and has stated its aim to lead in the field of 
AI ethics.5
Asia (outside China). The government of South Korea set up a Presidential 
Fourth Industrial Revolution Committee in 2017 and announced that it would 
invest $2 billion by 2022 to strengthen its capabilities in AI R&D.6 Singapore 
has launched an AI Singapore national initiative to enhance AI capabilities by 
forming a partnership of government institutions.7
Canada. International research institute CIFAR is leading the government’s 
Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy with three new AI institutes: the 
Alberta Intelligence Institute in Edmonton, the Vector Institute in Toronto, and 
MILA in Montreal; these cities are Canada’s three major AI centers.8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
McKinsey Global Institute
China to publish guideline on AI development: Minister, The State Council of the People’s 
Republic of China, March 11, 2018.
EU member states sign up to cooperate on artificial intelligence, European Commission, April 
10, 2018.
Aoife White, “EU calls for $24 billion in AI to keep with China, U.S.,” Bloomberg News, May 1, 
2018.
Romain Dillet, “France wants to become an artificial intelligence hub,” TechCrunch, March 
29, 2018.
Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal, HM Government, 2018; and UK can lead the way on ethical 
AI, says Lords Committee, UK Parliament, April 16, 2018.
“South Korea aims high on AI, pumps $2 billion into R&D,” SyncedReview, May 16, 2018.
AI Singapore (aisingapore.org/about-ai-singapore/).
Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy, CIFAR (cifar.ca/ai/pan-canadian-artificial
intelligence-strategy).
7
Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy
Box 2. Current technical limitations to leveraging AI, and some 
early progress
Businesses have recorded much progress in making AI applicable to 
them. However, the following five technical factors are arguably limiting the 
application of AI:1
Labeled training data. In supervised learning, machines do not learn by 
themselves but need to be taught, which means that humans must label and 
categorize the underlying training data. However, promising new techniques 
are emerging to reduce time spent on such efforts, including reinforcement 
learning and in-stream supervision such as generative adversarial networks, a 
supervised learning method in which two networks compete with each other 
to improve their understanding of a concept.2
Obtaining sufficiently large data sets. In many business use cases, it can 
be difficult to create or obtain data sets large enough to train algorithms. 
One example is the limited pool of the clinical-trial data necessary to predict 
healthcare treatment outcomes more accurately. Players with access to 
vast quantities of data may have an advantage. At present, the availability 
of labeled data is critical since most current AI models are trained through 
supervised learning, and categorizing data correctly requires a huge amount 
of human time. This may change as technologies and algorithms develop. One 
technique that could reduce the need for large data sets is one-shot learning, 
in which an AI model is pretrained in a set of related data and can then learn 
even from a small number of real-world examples.
Difficulty explaining results. It is often difficult to explain results from large, 
complex neural-network-based systems. One development—still at an early 
stage—that could improve the ease of explaining or transparency of models 
is local interpretable model agnostic explanations, which attempt to identify 
which parts of input data a trained model relies on most to make predictions. 
Another technique that is becoming relatively well established is the 
application of generalized additive models. They use single-feature models, 
which limit interactions between features and enable users to interpret each 
one more easily.
Difficulty generalizing. AI models still have difficulty carrying their 
experiences from one set of circumstances to another, which leaves 
companies having to commit resources to training new models even if use 
cases are relatively similar to previous ones. Transfer learning, in which 
an AI model is training to apply learning from one task to the next one, is 
showing promise.3
Risk of bias. The first four limitations may be solved as technology advances, 
but bias—in data in particular, but also in algorithms—has raised broad social 
concerns and may be challenging to resolve.4 A great deal of academic, 
nonprofit, and private-sector research is now underway on this issue.
1
2
3
4
8
“What AI can and can’t do (yet) for your business,” McKinsey Quarterly, January 2018.
Eric Horvitz, “Machine learning, reasoning, and intelligence in daily life: Directions and 
challenges,” Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence Techniques for Ambient Intelligence, 
Hyderabad, India, January 2007.
See John Guttag, Eric Horvitz, and Jenna Wiens, “A study in transfer learning: Leveraging 
data from multiple hospitals to enhance hospital-specific predictions,” Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, 2014, Volume 21, Number 4.
For more, see Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from hundreds of use cases, McKinsey 
Global Institute, April 2018.
Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy
McKinsey Global Institute
1. AN APPROACH TO ASSESSING THE 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF AI
The “new spring” for AI has prompted a great deal of research on the economic impact 
of AI, and consensus is emerging that it may offer substantial benefits. Thus far, research 
f
inds that a broad range of AI technologies could boost productivity levels and elevate 
GDP growth trajectories. The exact numbers vary because researchers have used 
different methodologies—for instance, considering a narrow or broad set of drivers of 
economic impact.22
While research to date has provided some early insights, the methodologies deployed have 
exhibited some shortcomings and limitations. First, estimates have tended to concentrate on 
developed economies such as Europe and the United States, plus China; outside these three 
economies, insights have tended to be limited.23 Second, the channels through which the 
macroeconomic impact occurs have not been clearly explained or exhaustive. For instance, 
research has largely focused on new AI investment demand that substitutes hours worked 
by humans. However, the reality is that a large share of AI use cases relate to retrofitting or 
replacing old capital investment by, for instance, embedding equipment with smart monitoring 
and preventive maintenance. Third, the link between microeconomic behavior and the impact 
of AI has not been made clearly. It is important to consider this link given the fact that the 
impact of AI depends on the level of its adoption by corporations and government entities, and 
that this pace of adoption is closely linked to microeconomic factors such as competition and 
the ability of organizations to deploy new technologies. Last but not least, research has tended 
to estimate the gross potential of AI, not taking into account the cost of implementation of these 
technologies into the socioeconomic system or negative externalities such as the impact of 
major disruptions on economic groups. The latter can be material. Consider, for instance, the 
cannibalization of old business models through AI-based innovation, or potentially extensive 
job reallocation due to the adoption of AI. Such negative externalities may be sufficiently large, 
and affect enough entities, to create the risk of a societal backlash against AI that could limit 
the full potential anticipated from these technologies.24
This research attempts to take a deeper and more detailed view of the impact of AI. (For a brief 
summary of the scope of the research, drawing on our extensive previous analysis of AI and 
applying a simulation-based approach, see Box 3, “Modeling approach and limitations.”) We 
have leveraged our previous research on automation to assess tasks and jobs that are at risk 
of being replaced by AI and automation technologies.25 On the issue of new jobs that may be 
created as AI becomes adopted and absorbed, we rely on early estimates in a set of countries 
highlighted in December 2017 MGI research.26 In this paper we mainly focus on the effect of AI 
on employment, whereas in earlier MGI research we also considered other broad economic 
effects likely to impact future employment such as the aging of populations and infrastructure 
investment, for instance. We also use what we learned from analyzing more than 400 AI use 
cases to assess the potential of AI in analytics, as well as its possible role in reducing costs and 
enhancing the generation of revenue.27
22 See, for instance, Nicholas Chen et al., Global economic impacts associated with artificial intelligence, Analysis 
Group, February 2016; Artificial intelligence, automation, and the economy, Executive Office of the President 
of the United States, December 2016; and Philippe Aghion, Benjamin F. Jones, and Charles I. Jones, Artificial 
intelligence and economic growth, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research working paper number 17
027, October 10, 2017.
23 Digitally-enabled automation and artificial intelligence: Shaping the future of work in Europe’s digital front-runners, 
McKinsey & Company, October 2017.
24 Other social concerns about AI, including those related to privacy and security, could also mitigate against AI 
adoption and therefore limit its economic impact.
25 See, for instance, A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, 
January 2017.
26 Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2017.
27 Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from hundreds of use cases, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018.
McKinsey Global Institute
Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy
9
Box 3. Modeling approach and limitations
This research focuses on AI’s potential impact on global 
economic activity at the country, sector, company, 
and worker levels, using a simulation. It does not 
consider other important aspects including ethics 
and cybersecurity, or the effect of these technologies 
on sustainability. Nor do we quantify aspects of the 
consumer surplus that may arise out of using AI 
technologies, such as saving time or living a healthier life. 
Some clarifications that may be useful include:
Definition of AI used in the economic modeling. 
Characterizing AI precisely is difficult because the 
definition tends to change depending on the specific 
context of research and application. For the purposes 
of our modeling, we used several data sources, 
including previous research on automation, analytics, 
and corporate surveys.1 Although the scope of AI 
technologies covered in various data sets is largely 
consistent, the data may include some variations at 
the detailed technical level. In the future of work and 
automation database, we took an expansive view of 
AI that included not only natural language processing, 
machine vision, and deep learning, but also robotics 
and other automation systems (consistent with 
many other researchers considering the impact of 
automation and AI on work). In our analysis of potential 
AI use cases, we employed a narrower view, focusing 
on deep learning techniques (especially feed forward 
neural networks, recurrent neural networks, and 
convolutional neural networks).2 The company-level 
survey used for our modeling of AI adoption and 
absorption covers five broad sets of AI technologies, 
namely computer vision, natural language, virtual 
assistants, robotic process automation, and advanced 
machine learning.
Data sources. We used both AI-specific and 
macroeconomic data sets. For AI-specific data, 
we used three sources. The first combined MGI’s 
regular survey of approximately 3,000 corporations 
in 14 sectors on digital technologies, undertaken for 
the VivaTechnology conference in Paris in June 2017, 
and the McKinsey annual survey on the extent of 
digitization in corporations worldwide.3 The second 
was MGI’s proprietary database of 400 potential AI 
use cases across industries and functions, used in 
this research to assess the impact on business.4 The 
third was MGI’s database that analyzes the potential 
to automate individual jobs—looking at activities 
rather than entire jobs—in 46 countries; this work 
assessed 800 existing occupations and around 2,000 
activities undertaken within these occupations.5 
For macroeconomic data, we used statistics from 
external organizations including the United Nations, 
the World Bank, the Organisation for Economic Co
operation and Development (OECD), and the World 
Economic Forum.
Simulation and econometrics approach. We 
used economic modeling and simulation to see how 
the impact of AI may change in response to certain 
assumptions and inputs. Rather than forecasting 
outcomes, based on the best evidence collected so 
far, the research simulates the likely impact from AI 
given different contexts at the country, sector, and 
company levels. For the econometric simulation of 
f
irm-level AI adoption and absorption, we used a 
double blind and multi-sample approach to ensure 
that our results were solid. MGI’s econometrics team 
and a team from the Free University of Brussels 
independently analyzed both surveys mentioned 
above.6 Both teams estimated and converged on 
the dynamics of propensity to adopt and absorb 
technologies. Each team found that consistent 
dynamics of adoption and absorption were visible 
in both samples used. Our simulation of economic 
impact and competitive dynamics also drew 
1 
2
3
4
5
6
See A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017; and Jobs lost, jobs gained: 
Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2017.
Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from hundreds of use cases, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018.
Artificial intelligence: The next digital frontier? McKinsey Global Institute, June 2017. The online survey was conducted from June 20 to July 10, 
2017, and garnered responses from 1,619 C-level executives and senior managers representing the full range of regions, industries, company 
sizes, and functional specialties. See How digital reinventors are pulling away from the pack, McKinsey & Company survey, October 2017.
Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from several hundred use cases, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018.
A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017.
The results of these surveys have been discussed previously in Jacques Bughin, “Wait-and-see could be a costly AI strategy,” MIT Sloan 
Management Review, June 15, 2018; and Jacques Bughin, Tanguy Catlin, Martin Hirt, and Paul Wilmott, “Why digital strategies fail,” McKinsey 
Quarterly, January 2018.
McKinsey Global Institute
Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy
10
on academic literature (for further detail on our 
econometric approach, see the technical appendix).7
Approach to AI adoption and full absorption. The 
concepts of adoption and full (and partial) absorption 
have been used in various contexts. In this research, 
we use an economic entity—notably a company—
and its activities as a unit for adoption. Adoption 
of AI is when that entity chooses to invest in one of 
the five generic AI technologies (computer vision, 
natural language, virtual assistants, robotic process 
automation, and advanced machine learning) either 
for experimentation or for a narrow functional use.8 Full 
absorption means that all five generic AI technologies 
are adopted and integrated into broad enterprise 
workflows. Full absorption is the stage at which 
economic benefits tend to kick in and recur.9 However, 
we note that full absorption does not mean that there 
is a fixed range of technologies. New technologies and 
applications will continue to emerge. In this report, we 
use the term “full” as opposed to “partial” to indicate 
much broader use of AI technologies than is the case 
in adoption or a pilot.
Limitations and sensitivities. Our firm-level 
simulation is dependent on the quality of data from the 
surveys used as inputs, and we acknowledge that this 
approach has two potential limitations. First, survey 
answers depend on the knowledge and perceptions 
of respondents, and their understanding of AI may 
vary, possibly affecting the quality of the insights 
and data gathered in this way. Second, the data set 
from our survey results may be skewed toward early 
movers. Extrapolating insights from the survey may 
therefore lead us to overestimate the economic impact 
because the next wave of companies adopting AI may 
display different behavior in terms of AI adoption. For 
these reasons, the result of our simulation should be 
interpreted as being the upper bound of estimates 
of AI’s economic impact. However, we also note 
that competitive pressure is a key factor driving 
up the adoption level. If new companies that are 
more agile and embrace AI more rapidly join the AI 
race quicker than expected, this could push up the 
adoption curve.10 Notwithstanding, the findings in this 
research are directionally consistent with our previous 
research. We also acknowledge that our simulation 
is highly sensitive to the results of corporate surveys 
on AI absorption. The adoption and absorption 
of AI by companies are the foundation of several 
dimensions of impact we have modeled, including 
labor augmentation, substitution, and innovation as 
well as transition costs. We have conducted three 
annual surveys, and, in general, the results of the 
simulation have remained broadly similar. However, we 
acknowledge that, when new data are gathered, the 
adoption and full absorption curve and the results of 
the simulation could change.
Note: While simulated figures are given that emerge from 
the above methods, the numbers presented in this report 
should not be read as forecasts, but rather are intended to 
provide a directional perspective on the potential impact 
of AI.

What is new about this latest research is its attempt to gauge the macroeconomic impact of 
AI globally, and the fact that we have included in our estimate both the cost of implementing 
AI and the impact of a competitive race for adoption and absorption of these technologies. 
First, it builds on an understanding of the behavior of firms and the dynamics of various 
sectors to develop a bottom-up view of how AI technologies are adopted and absorbed 
(see the description of our seven-step micro-to-macro approach in the technical appendix). 
Second, the research takes into account the likely disruptions that countries, companies, 
and workers are likely to experience as they transition to AI. There will probably be costs 
during this transition period, and they need to be factored into any estimate. We look closely 
at how economic gains and losses are likely to be distributed among firms, employees, and 
countries, and how this distribution could potentially hamper the capture of AI benefits. And 
third, the research examines the dynamics of AI for a wide range of countries—clustered into 
groups with similar characteristics—with the aim of giving a more global view.
The primary goal of this research is to move the discussion forward by presenting our 
approach to simulating the economic benefits and challenges that AI creates, rather than 
producing specific forecasts. We will continue to update our analysis as we learn more 
about AI technologies and their use on the ground, and accumulate newer data sets. The 
numbers presented in this discussion paper will inevitably change, and therefore readers 
should take this analysis not as a conclusion but as a guide to the potential economic impact 
of AI based on the best knowledge we have at this stage.
2. AI HAS THE POTENTIAL TO BE A SIGNIFICANT 
DRIVER OF ECONOMIC GROWTH
Predicting the economic impact of AI or any disruptive technology is a highly speculative 
exercise. This is a world of near-continuous discontinuity. We have already highlighted in 
our previous work that the scope and pace of automation deployment depend on several 
variables—some more predictable than others—including technical feasibility, the cost of 
developing and deploying technologies for specific uses in the workplace, labor-market 
dynamics including the quality and quantity of labor and associated wages, the benefits 
of automation beyond labor substitution, and regulatory and social acceptance. Similar 
factors are likely to determine the pace of AI adoption.28 In addition to these factors, 
competitors enabled by digital technologies can burst upon the scene, seemingly from 
nowhere, putting apparently well-protected and robust incumbent businesses under 
attack. Vast new markets can rise at a rapid pace. Consider, for instance, that only ten 
years ago, China accounted for 1 percent of global e-commerce transactions; today, its 
share is over 40 percent.29 Technology has accelerated and intensified the natural forces 
of market competition, and developments are extremely hard to read. It is because of such 
considerations that we have built scenarios in our previous work, and here extend those 
through the use of simulations (please refer to Box 3 for methodology and sources).
28 Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December 
2017.
29 Digital China: Powering the economy to global competitiveness, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2017.
12
Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy
McKinsey Global Institute
All this said, the results of our simulation of AI’s gross and net effect on GDP and labor 
markets show that AI could add around 16 percent to global output by 2030, or about 
$13 trillion, compared with today. This would be incremental value created in addition to 
current global output. This simulation is a combination of a large increase of 26 percent 
in GDP growth driven by AI, and costs related to the transition to these technologies (for 
instance, labor displacement) and their implementation (for example, the deployment of AI 
solutions), as well as negative externalities for the baseline of economic activity (such as loss 
of consumption during unemployment). Together these elements may produce an annual 
average net contribution of about 1.2 percent of activity growth between now and 2030.
The impact on economies would be significant if this scenario were to materialize. In the 
case of steam engines, it has been estimated that, between 1850 and 1910, they enabled 
productivity growth of 0.3 percent per year. Research has found that the introduction 
of robots in manufacturing and the introduction of IT accounted for 0.4 percent and 
0.6 percent in annual productivity increases, respectively.30 Recent estimates put the 
productivity impact of information and communications technology (ICT) and early digital 
technologies such as broadband at 0.6 percent annually during the 2000s.31
WE EXAMINED SEVEN POSSIBLE CHANNELS FOR AI IMPACT
Several factors affect AI-driven productivity growth, including labor automation, innovation, 
and new competition. Micro factors, such as the pace of adoption of AI, and macro factors 
such as a country’s global connectedness and labor-market structure contribute to the 
size of the impact. Our simulation examined seven possible channels of impact. The first 
three relate to the impact of AI adoption on the need for, and mix of, production factors that 
have direct impact on the productivity of firms. The other four are externalities linked to the 
adoption of AI and related to the broad economic environment and the transition to AI. We 
acknowledge that these seven channels are not definitive or necessarily comprehensive, but 
rather a starting point based on our current understanding and trends currently underway. 
As AI continues to develop, our approach to understanding the implications of AI will need to 
continue to evolve.
Production channels
We considered the direct economic impact of AI on three production dimensions. First, we 
examined additional complementary inputs to improve  productivity—what economists call 
labor and capital “augmentation.”32 The inputs needed to operate new AI capacity include 
new engineers and big data analysts who will develop and deploy AI solutions. Second, 
investment in AI technologies will save not only on labor as machines take over tasks that 
humans currently perform, but also on old capital, for instance by enabling preventative 
maintenance that increases the life span of assets and thereby reduces the need to invest 
in new equipment. Third, we looked at more and better innovation associated with AI 
technologies. In general, process innovation should enable firms to produce the same 
output with lower inputs, while product and service innovation tends to boost output and the 
level of inputs such as employment and capital